Requirements
------------

- C++14 compatible compiler
- [CMake](http://www.cmake.org)
- [GMP (GNU multiprecision library)](http://gmplib.org/)

Platform-Specific Setup
-----------------------

- [Linux (Ubuntu)](ubuntu.md)
- [Windows (msys2)](msys2.md)
- [Windows (Visual Studio)](msvc.md)
- [macOS (homebrew)](osx-10.9.md)
- Linux/macOS/WSL via [Nix](https://nixos.org/nix/): Call `nix-shell` in the project root. That's it.
- There is also an [**experimental** setup based purely on Nix](nix.md) that works fundamentally differently from the
  make/CMake setup described on this page.

Generic Build Instructions
--------------------------

Setting up a basic release build:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/leanprover/lean4
cd lean4
mkdir -p build/release
cd build/release
cmake ../..
make
```

Setting up a basic debug build:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/leanprover/lean4
cd lean4
mkdir -p build/debug
cd build/debug
cmake -D CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=DEBUG ../..
make
```

This will compile the Lean library and binary into the `stage1` subfolder; see
below for details. Add `-jN` for an appropriate `N` to `make` for a parallel
build.

Useful CMake Configuration Settings
-----------------------------------

Pass these along with the `cmake ../..` command.

* `-D CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=`\
  Select the build type. Valid values are `RELEASE` (default), `DEBUG`,
  `RELWITHDEBINFO`, and `MINSIZEREL`.

* `-D CMAKE_C_COMPILER=`\
  `-D CMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=`\
  Select the C/C++ compilers to use. Official Lean releases currently use Clang;
  see also `.github/workflows/ci.yml` for the CI config.

Lean will automatically use [CCache](https://ccache.dev/) if available to avoid
redundant builds, especially after stage 0 has been updated (see below).

Lean Build Pipeline
-------------------

Since version 4, Lean is a partially bootstrapped program: most parts of the
frontend and compiler are written in Lean itself and thus need to be built before
building Lean itself - which is needed to again build those parts. This cycle is
broken by using pre-built C files checked into the repository (which ultimately
go back to a point where the Lean compiler was not written in Lean) in place of
these Lean inputs and then compiling everything in multiple stages up to a fixed
point. The build directory is organized in these stages:

```bash
stage0/
  # Bootstrap binary built from stage0/src/.
  # We do not use any other files from this directory in further stages.
  bin/lean
stage1/
  include/
    config.h  # config variables used to build `lean` such as use allocator
    runtime/lean.h  # runtime headers, used by extracted C code, uses `config.h`
  share/lean/
    Makefile  # used by `leanmake`
  lib/
    lean/**/*.olean  # the Lean library (incl. the compiler) compiled by the previous stage's `lean`
    temp/**/*.{c,o}  # the library extracted to C and compiled by `leanc`
    libInit.a libStd.a libLean.a  # static libraries of the Lean library
    libleancpp.a  # a static library of the C++ sources of Lean
  bin/
    lean  # the Lean compiler & server linked together from the above libraries
    leanc  # a wrapper around a C compiler supplying search paths etc
    leanmake  # a wrapper around `make` supplying the Makefile above
stage2/...
stage3/...
```

Stage 0 can be viewed as a blackbox since it does not depend on any local
changes and is equivalent to downloading a bootstrapping binary as done in other
compilers. The build for any other stage starts by building the runtime and
standard library from `src/`, using the `lean` binary from the previous stage in
the latter case, which are then assembled into a new `bin/lean` binary.

Each stage can be built by calling `make stageN` in the root build folder.
Running just `make` will default to stage 1, which is usually sufficient for
testing changes on the test suite or other files outside of the stdlib. However,
it might happen that the stage 1 compiler is not able to load its own stdlib,
e.g. when changing the .olean format: the stage 1 stdlib will use the format
generated by the stage 0 compiler, but the stage 1 compiler will expect the new
format. In this case, we should continue with building and testing stage 2
instead, which will both build and expect the new format. Note that this is only
possible because when building a stage's stdlib, we use the previous compiler
but never load the previous stdlib (since everything is `prelude`). We can also
use stage 2 to test changes in the compiler or other "meta" parts, i.e. changes
that affect the produced (.olean or .c) code, on the stdlib and compiler itself.
We are not aware of any "meta-meta" parts that influence more than two stages of
compilation, so stage 3 should always be identical to stage 2 and only exists as
a sanity check.

In summary, doing a standard build via `make` involves these steps:

1. compile the `stage0/src` archived sources into `stage0/bin/lean`
1. use it to compile the current library (*including* your changes) into `stage1/lib`
1. link that and the current C++ code from `src/` into `stage1/bin/lean`

You now have a Lean binary and library that include your changes, though their
own compilation was not influenced by them, that you can use to test your
changes on test programs whose compilation *will* be influenced by the changes.

Finally, when we want to use new language features in the library, we need to
update the stage 0 compiler, which can be done via `make -C stageN update-stage0`.
`make update-stage0` without `-C` defaults to stage1.

Development Setup
-----------------

After building a stage, you can invoke `make -C stageN test` (or, even better,
`make -C stageN test ARGS=-jN` to make `ctest` parallel) to run the Lean test suite.
`make test` without `-C` defaults to stage1. While the Lean tests will
automatically use that stage's corresponding Lean executables, for running tests
or compiling Lean programs manually, you need to put them into your `PATH`
yourself. A simple option for doing that is to use
[`elan`](https://github.com/leanprover/elan), see the next section.

You can use any of the [supported editors](../setup.md) for editing the Lean source
code. If you set up `elan` as below, opening `src/` as a *workspace folder* should
ensure that stage 0 will be used for file in that directory. You should also set the
`LEAN_SRC_PATH` environment variable to the path of the `src/` directory to enable
go-to-definition in the stdlib (automatically set when using `nix-shell`).

Dev setup using elan
--------------------

You can use [`elan`](https://github.com/leanprover/elan) to easily switch between
stages and build configurations based on the current directory, both for the
`lean/leanc/leanmake` binaries in your shell's PATH and inside your editor.

If you haven't already installed elan, you can do so, without installing a
default version of Lean, using
```bash
curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/leanprover/elan/master/elan-init.sh -sSf | sh -s -- --default-toolchain none
```
You can use `elan toolchain link` to give a specific stage build directory a
reference name, then use `elan override set` to associate such a name to the
current directory. We usually want to use `stage0` for editing files in `src`
and `stage1` for everything else (e.g. tests).
```
# in the Lean rootdir
elan toolchain link lean4 build/release/stage1
elan toolchain link lean4-stage0 build/release/stage0
# make `lean` etc. point to stage1 in the rootdir and subdirs
elan override set lean4
cd src
# make `lean` etc. point to stage0 anywhere inside `src`
elan override set lean4-stage0
```
You can also use the `+toolchain` shorthand (e.g. `lean +lean4-debug`) to switch
toolchains on the spot. `lean4-mode` will automatically use the `lean` executable
associated with the directory of the current file as long as `lean4-rootdir` is
unset and `~/.elan/bin` is in your `exec-path`. Where Emacs sources the
`exec-path` from can be a bit unclear depending on your configuration, so
alternatively you can also set `lean4-rootdir` to `"~/.elan"` explicitly.

You might find that debugging through elan, e.g. via `gdb lean`, disables some
things like symbol autocompletion because at first only the elan proxy binary
is loaded. You can instead pass the explicit path to `bin/lean` in your build
folder to gdb, or use `gdb $(elan which lean)`.

Troubleshooting
---------------

* Call `make` with an additional `VERBOSE=1` argument to print executed commands.
